Notes on fully-determined protocols (#1)
statechannels/wallet-specs: notes/fully-determined-protocols.md

# Fully-Determined Protocols

> A _fully-determined_ protocol contains all the information to specify the states that should be exchanged as part of the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _fully-determined_ protocol is a protocol whose behaviour is a deterministic function of the channel store.
```

Reviewer: I think "deterministic" describes the notion you're trying to capture, so we should just use that. Otherwise, "fully-determined" sounds like some special type of algorithm.

It's not quite true that such a protocol contains all the information needed to determine which states to exchange, since some of the information will be stored in the "channel store". For example, `OpenChannel` might abort if the nonce has already been used.

Reviewer: > I think "deterministic" describes the notion you're trying to capture, so we should just use that. Otherwise, "fully-determined" sounds like some special type of algorithm.

Since none of our protocols satisfy [this](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deterministic_algorithm#Formal_definition), I think deterministic might be misleading.

Put another way: once a set of wallets know that they are executing a given fully-determined protocol, they shouldn't need any communication beyond the exchange of state channel states.

For example, the protocol

```
OpenChannel(participants, balances, appDefinition, appData) // not fully-determined
```

is _not_ fully-determined, as in order to construct the states a `channelNonce` is needed. The fully-determined version of this protocol would need to include the `channelNonce`:

```
OpenChannel(participants, balances, appDefinition, appData, channelNonce) // fully-determined
```

## Some names of fully-determined protocols [WIP]

_This is a starting point for writing down some fully-determined protocols. More thought is probably required to figure out if they're actually fully-determined or not!_

- `OpenChannel(participants, initialBalances, nonce, appData, appDef)`
  - Each participant checks to see they don't have a nonce collision
  - Succeeds when we have a pre-fund-setup support
- `DirectFund(channelId)`
  - Abandon if channel doesn't exist or is not in pre-fund-setup
  - Fund when it's your turn.
  - Succeeds when we have a post-fund-setup round

> - `TopUp(ledgerId, participant, amount, ledgerTurnNum)`

Reviewer: The proposed `DirectFund` protocol also covers top-ups.
```suggestion
```

  - Do we need the turnNum?
- `PartialWithdrawal(ledgerId, participant, amount, newNonce)`
  - Will need to call `OpenChannel` to create a replacement ledger channel.
  - Probably also need `newParticipants`, to feed to `OpenChannel`, as we probably shouldn't assume that the parties will want to use the same signing keys
- `LedgerFund(channelId, ledgerId, ledgerTurnNum)`
  - Ends when in post fund
- `VirtualFund(balances, ledgerABId, jointNonce, guaranteeAHNonce, guaranteeBHNonce, ledgerAHId,....)`
  - Assumes that the `ledgerAB` already exists
  - No one participant actually needs all this information, which means there's scope to decompose this into a handful of fully-determined protocols between subsets of the participants. Conceptually it's probably useful to consider this as a protocol in its own right though. For example, these protocols could be:
    - `VirtualFundA(balances, ledgerABId, jointNonce, .. things with AH)`
    - `VirtualFundB(balances, ledgerABId, jointNonce, .. things with BH)`

>     - `VirtualFundH(balances, ledgerABId, jointNonce, .. things with AH and BH)`

Reviewer: At first glance, I believed H needed to know everything. But I don't think it's true. To make sure I understand this:
- A doesn't need to know about the guarantor or ledger channels between B and H
- B is symmetric (they would use the same protocol, just with different inputs)
- H doesn't need about the target channel: H will sign any outcome update that's safe
